hi everyone welcome back uh thanks so
much for joining thank you so much Gr a
for hosting us it's really really nice
to be back here uh we used to have a few
of our vents here and it's such a unique
space and it's so modular and flexible
it's it's really really wonderful thanks
a lot for being back here it's also
really fun perhaps for a few of you uh
perhaps as a little bit of Intel we had
um a kind of prequel to this panel um at
dweb from the internet archive and there
we talked a little bit more about the
technical issues about ownership in a
digital world so I'm really excited also
to dive in into kind of like policy
copyright and especially implications
for artists and for creators as many of
you guys really are so I'm really really
happy to have such a fantastic panel
here and yeah Barry I already know you
from from our last panel thank you so so
much for joining really really excited H
to have you as well here K while
representing creative comments and very
good to see you too fed and Kurt and
finally Matt so perhaps we can dive
right into it I would love to know maybe
from all of you but maybe you could even
start us off if you want to what does it
even mean um to have uh ownership in a
digital world and especially how did
that concept change let's say in The
Last 5 Years uh what issues were
pressing if you want to give a very
quick overview like let's say 5 years
ago versus now and how do you see that
changing you know 5 years ago we didn't
have all of that AI IMS that we
currently have so uh if you just want to
lead us in with a brief his IAL overview
of like how did we get here and why are
we talking about these topics in a
little bit of a different way now uh
sure be be happy to is this is this
working okay um I'll actually go a
little bit further back then then five
years you an overview like you know what
is the difference between physical
ownership and digital ownership or
digital issues and one of the things
that's sort of interesting about you
know physical ownership is you have a
thing you have sort of rights to control
it to exclude others from using as
exclusive rights and if you give it to
somebody else then they have it and you
don't have it anymore and with a a
digital good if you give it to somebody
else generally you still have it uh it
makes it you know Economist would call
that not you it's non- ralist uh and you
can create perfect copies and it's
relatively easy and low cost to do so so
it sort of moves away some of the
scarcity that underlines physical object
ownership uh and these issues created
well issues were created by these issues
I should say it's a a bad paraphrase
but uh like it came up in the context
where it just became really easy for
people to transfer around uh digital
goods and that moved away from the
physical Goods so like I one of the
earlier issues uh was around music uh
where previously the recording industry
would make a a physical photo record CD
such sell it to somebody and if they
wanted to you know give it to a friend
they had to hand over the disc and it
wasn't very easy for someone to make a
you know print a photo record at home so
uh it was just uh physical physical
ownership was determining who could who
could have the music and then that that
changed and it became super easy this
got to some of the early uh big internet
fights uh peer-to-peer file sharing uh
became prominent when people were
trading around things and then there was
an attempt to sort of reimplement some
of that uh controls that might have come
with physical ownership by using digital
Rights Management DRM and so the they
made a number of ways of trying to like
take us CD and make it so you couldn't
copy in they were all miserable failures
uh so like it was not uh not not solving
that issue um from their perspective at
least it was definitely solving the
issue for people who wanted to have lots
of music so that that was relatively
became a a less of an issue these days
with the transition to streaming where
you would get a subscription to a
streaming service you could have all the
music that you you wanted until you
stopped paying and so that you were
getting sort of a license instead of a
uh the actual good and you know that
that was perhaps a a better way to deal
with it when people really wanted to
have uh music or later you know movies
uh and didn't want to pay the you know
$20 a a album that was the the previous
price uh so then sort of Licensing but
licensing also has it its pluses and
minuses in pitss there some great things
that have been done with licensing like
open source licenses Creative Commons
but also uh licensing
is trying to take away one of the other
aspects of uh that was a benefit of
physical ownership the first sale
Doctrine so that when you had a physical
copy of something you could do what it
would that is the you know the doctrine
that brings you things like libraries
libraries are really great and they rely
it by buying a book and then they can
lend it out to whoever they like without
having to go back to the the original
publisher uh and say oh well then they
trying to license it and this is coming
up uh you sort of fast forwarding a
little bit but this is coming up right
now in the case of the internet archive
and its conditional uh digital lending
and the uh National Emergency library
and you know at least at least the
prospect of replacing that rights that
you get with a physical copy with uh
with a licensing that can do it and even
the licensing can do some reverse action
onto ownership of physical Goods by
having where you a physical good but the
licenses and restrictions around that
prevent you from doing whatever you want
with it so like there it comes up the
right to repair like you may have a good
and be prohibited from doing certain
things um so another another uh tension
that as come up is uh what about rights
on like publicly available information
and sometimes that was addressed through
copyright so this is this is some of the
issues that rounded uh a long time ago
but what brought you web search brought
you being able to scan the internet find
things and then create a search engine
out of them uh was hitting on uh issues
of copyright so like image search it was
one of the the first things and it was
it was a fair use and that was a good
good solution for it but then there came
to be issues of people using uh uh
technical restrictions and also terms of
service so there was an attempt to block
people from uh scanning information of
certain portions of the web through
terms of service and in the worst cases
people were trying to enforce that with
hacking laws so was a you know a a
hacking to go onto a publicly available
website in violation of terms of service
um anyway that this isn't over with a
lot of issues so sort of fast forward
again to the to the present a lot of
these things are coming up in genitor of
AI that has a once again some issues
with scanning uh all the the publicly
available uh information uh bringing up
both copyright issues which might be
addressed by by fair use and then uh we
also have you know factual things which
copyright does not protect and and how
is that going to be addressed so uh I
guess I know many issues with ownership
wow wonderful that's quite the birds
view of the history in a nutshell pretty
much does anyone want to add anything to
it any crucial pieces that we
missed no okay all right well uh we're
going to dig I think we're going to
double click on a few of these items I
think now coming up and perhaps like you
know I'd love to know from you Fred as
well um I scrolled on your Twitter feed
uh and there was a lot on you know like
really like what does copyright in
particular mean for a generative AI is
it perhaps even going to break it but
also I would love to know just like what
does copyright mean for generative AI
but also what does it mean for creators
using generative AI like can you give us
like some kind of like yeah bits and
pieces or like at least a pulse on the
issue right now sure I think to me the
interest The Story begins long before
generative AI um everyone has been
talking about that of late but machine
learning which is sort of the foundation
of what is now called generative AI has
been with us a lot longer and the idea
of using data to train machines to allow
machines to learn so they can undertake
tasks for us uh that's been around for a
while uh you may be taking for granted I
sure take for granted Google translate
uh which has been around a long time
it's a machine learning uh system the
your phones optimize the photographs you
take using systems trans Tred on large
bodies of data uh generative AI is not
fundamentally different from those
Technologies it's a different
application uh and I think a lot of
people are encountering it for the first
time but many of the underlying
questions are the same questions uh for
example is it okay from a copyright
point of view to show a machine Learning
System millions of pages of text in
order to teach it to translate between
languages in order to teach it to answer
your questions uh in a system like
Chachi BT uh in order to allow it to for
example spot biases in data um these
systems have an enormous number of
different applications um for creators
uh I think it's actually a very exciting
moment uh because the tools now are
really turning into Creator Tools in a
way that was less obvious before uh and
so if folks have tried mid Journey Dolly
any of the sort of visual text to image
generators um I know as someone who was
always more uh uh more well equipped to
express myself in words than in images
it has been transformational to be able
to describe an idea and have that
description turned into something visual
uh I've joked that we are we are on the
cusp of what is maybe the greatest
Renaissance in t-shirt art ever uh as
everyone who can express an idea in
words can now get a A visual
representation of that idea um and of
course uh I'm not saying that we're at a
point now where the greatest and most
Cutting Edge Art of our time is going to
be spat out of a out of a generative AI
far from it uh but I do often reflect
back I'm now in my mid-50s and I reflect
back on my experience in the 80s when
desktop publishing software landed for
the first time on what was then the very
early MacIntosh and boy was there an
explosion of terrible flyer design uh
let me tell you but that how many funds
can you have in one newsletter yeah yeah
but that was the beginning that was the
beginning of putting that power in the
hands of millions of people who didn't
have the power power to make a flyer
before um and that of course led to
photoshop led to an enormous number of
tools that visual artists take for
granted every day uh and I think we're
in that same spot now with generative AI
Technologies this is the beginning of
what very soon I think will be a new
toolkit that creators will have at their
disposal I mean these are creative tools
these are tools meant to augment human
creativity that's kind of what they are
uh sort of Photoshop times 100 if you
will uh and so I think it's going to be
great news for creators uh as this stuff
enhances their capabilities yeah cool I
thought we're were going to go to the
creators a little later but now that
we're on them let's maybe like chime in
here because I think one interesting
thing is always you know when you have
new tools um at the beginning you have a
lack of skills of using them right and
then over time new skills develop new
templates get built and it's kind of
this fly whe of new tool and skill
development and kicks off these entirely
new ecosystems and economies really in
which people cooperate and like you know
really um and really build together and
I think that's just absolutely uh
interesting so I would love to know also
from all of you guys really at this
point since we're already talking about
uh especially the impact on on artist
and how do you how have you seen already
the like the new tools that are coming
along in AI impacting artists and how do
you see them also kind of like making
them their own uh and and really playing
with them in a more like let's say
individualized uh way and I don't know
if you cat or Barry do you want to chime
in on
that go ahead
cat let's see like mostly uh we've just
seen a lot of people like feel empowered
to create things where they weren't
before like Fred was talking about like
the like making up for the skills that
he was missing and I think we've seen
that particularly uh in the Creative
Commons contexts where where people are
used to like building and remixing on
each other's work like the CC license is
basically a signal that like I want this
work to be part of a public conversation
I want want people to build on it like
the people who have been uh part of
those communities are you know embracing
the idea of now I I can not only build
on one work at a time I can build on
like the entire you know the entire
universe of works that have come into
these systems and uh that has challenged
a lot of people's intuitions about like
what would happen with their Works uh
which I think goes on to Future
conversations but we've seen a lot of
people like Embrace that we've also seen
a lot of people like worry about what
that means for the future in themselves
and try and withdraw from it as much as
possible uh and we've seen that in in
the communities who have embraced
sharing like those two uh schools of
thought yeah it's definely mixed back I
don't know Barry you didn't have a mic
sure um I think um so from Gray area's
perspective we're really interested in a
couple of things one is uh demonstrating
the value of artists in engaging in
context the value of artistic thinking
in places where people don't normally
see artists engaged and so the two big
Tech technology Centric things that have
happened in the last while um let's say
5 years uh have been nfts and AI we'll
say generative AI
um uh where artists were the first use
case to demonstrate the value of the
technology to everyone and it's really
the the first driving you know uh force
on it and so just purely econ and and
you know Gray we uh for example did the
first um what I think at least uh people
would recognize is generative AI show
which was with Google deep dream in 2016
and so um we
certainly uh believe in the value of new
tools to create new forms of Art and new
conversations and um believe that um
it's necessary to do so to have a
conversation with our current
contemporary condition right um there's
a bigger economic um conversation to be
had uh and this isn't just gerine to
technology but it's a bigger
multi-stakeholder conversation with
museums and Galleries and all sorts of
cultural institutions and artists and
players um
which uh I don't think as a society we
have a we you know we have a conception
of how do we expect artists and creators
to make a living because in so far as we
were powering this uh new set of
foundational tools off a class of
creators to make content for it um if
that class of if that class erods and
can't make a living then we're somewhere
else and I'm not um so you know and you
look at Civic money like the Nea and you
have $220 million for the whole nation
to like fund that effort and and it's I
don't think we have a clear idea of what
all of the sort of bouquet of revenue
streams and things for artists to even
make it a possible livelihood is so um
we're interested in decentralized
Technologies to rethink ownership models
um you know one of the things about the
sort of early Creative Commons sort of
like sharing economy you know the
metaphor was always um we share because
it uh you know raised the
Water Rising tide ra raises all boats um
with AI it seems like the rising water
is Raising one boat some like the
metaphor breaks down you know some
people's boats uh because these models
are
only intelligent in so far as they've
been imbued with knowledge that was
created from a corpus of creative labor
from people that are like modeled into
to the model and when we prompt them
that knowledge is what is um uh rendered
explicit through the prompt um
so what do we do about that um and if
our answer is that that labor can be
monetized with no um you know if the
idea is okay all these new jobs will be
created from the tool and those people
just have to sort of like catch up
um okay but I think we have to have some
other answer you know I mean that maybe
that's the maybe that's the way it is
right maybe there's no other good answer
to that just like in the same way as
we're Tethered to a physical reality or
something if that's true I don't
necessarily believe that but like if
that's true then we have to have some
other answers for how this economy is is
sustained or else we're going to find
ourselves
with machines reading Machines are made
made for machines and um unless you're
uh transhumanist more near term than I
am then like that's a problem you know
well let's brainstorm a few
Alternatives perhaps um are you at
radical change you know I know that
you're working on so many really
wonderful new tools and new ways to kind
of like um interact in novel ways in the
digital world including I just not the
soulbound tokens papers and so forth
from GLA in a very different context but
since you already brought up nfts uh do
you have any tools or any toolkit that
you think is really exciting for um
people to use especially like perhaps
more generally about ownership in
digital world but perhaps even
especially for creators and for artists
well I think that um I think that a a
lot of the work that we're doing
including the work on partial common
ownership creates interesting
possibilities for licensing
Arrangements common ownership commcial
common ownership is B is essentially
just a way of of splitting apart an
ownership interest into two pieces where
one of them is sort of a a periodically
auction sort of stewardship type
interest and the other is like an
entitlement to a permanent stream of
income based on that um to make a to
make a long story short but and I think
it creates interesting possibilities for
licensing but I do want to say I think
that like I think that we're in a moment
where uh licensing doesn't is can't
solve all the problems because um the
like the way that I um I mean what
really strikes me is just
that uh training training a model on
copyrighted material either is or is not
a violation of copyright right that is a
fact and uh both of those possibilities
are pretty much unacceptable um if if it
uh you know if it is a violation of
copyright then you know
there's some major issues that are going
to have to be worked there if it's if
it's not an violation of copyright I
think a Maj issue that is to you know
and I think that to see those issues
it's actually important to what what's
most useful I actually think is to is to
go back to the like hundreds of years
the printing press because uh like
imagine if imagine if copyright statutes
had never been passed if copyright
statutes had never been passed uh all of
the Power you know that the printing
press you know imbued into the written
word basically would have accured in the
hands of uh printers of the owners of
presses and uh that would have been bad
that would have uh created super weird
incentives for the production of
information it and it would have
alienated producers of the written word
from you know any control over how that
what happens with that information and
um and it would have made it would have
been like an explosion of propaganda you
can't even imagine right the
um uh it would have um it would have
made information impossible to interpret
for the reader and uh uh by because we
can't we can't interpret information
unless we know where the information is
coming from like it's just an essential
part of the context and um uh so so I
think that we're in a moment where in
view of that Stark copyright thing we
need to rethink intellectual property we
we need to rethink what we want the
copyright statute should be doing we
need to rethink you know and only when
we've done that can we introduce you
know in new licensing mechanisms right
we because what are we licensing what
are the rights that we're able to
license or not license here yeah I love
that analogy uh and perhaps you also
really working with creative comments
especially on that licensing part so can
you share a few updates on like what
have you been recently cooking up there
I see it's quite a bunch and uh and what
are potential implications or use cases
for this sure uh so I'll actually start
by saying in fact that we are not
working on licensing because like that
copyright doesn't seem to be the right
way to approach the problems that AI is
creating in the universe uh so I'll
start by talking a little bit what uh
about Creative Commons and what it was
intended to do uh it is basically a
release valve on copyright like like uh
it was a reaction to the extension of
copyright putting even a longer term on
the exclusive rights granted uh
copyrights intended to be a compromise
that the government is granting a
monopoly on something that that doesn't
want to be a monopoly in order to make
it economically sustainable to create
Works uh and it's a little bit one siiz
fits-all like it it applies to software
it applies to like the photo you took in
5 seconds like it applies to the
Limerick you wrote in the bathroom and
uh it applies to the painting that you
took 10 years to do like uh it doesn't
work for all purposes and that
especially doesn't work in a world where
like maybe you want to share some of
those things uh you know and uh there's
also a balance with free expression like
you put something out into the world
like you're putting it out there for
people to comment on people to rebuild
like people to incorporate in their own
works like the concept of the the author
is somebody who has exclusively created
a work and exclusively controlls that
work uh is a little bit of an artificial
construct and it's something that only
came out in the past Century or two uh
and in part because of copyright because
of these economic rights uh authorship
is collaborative authorship is communal
something didn't just come out from
space and an a singular person created
it like it came from everything that
came before uh and copyright is trying
to put bounds on that to make it
possible economically to be an artist uh
what cc recognized is that's not as the
bundle of rights that uh government
created is not the one that everybody
wanted or everybody needed there are
other models that would suit those
purposes uh so we're a little bit of O
an overlay on top of the default
copyright system and I'm going to make
another dated reference if you ever used
computer software that had a plastic
overlay on top of your keyboard that's a
little bit REM M the keys to other
things that's a little bit how I think
about Creative Commons uh if you saw my
sentence talk earlier talking about
systems and how like we created these
systems like we can recreate these
systems uh even if they seem to be
immutable even if they were put in force
by powerful institutions that's a little
bit what Creative Commons does like we
don't have to remake copyright law by
reforming Congress we're going to do
this hack we're going to put on this
overlay and remake the system the way
that we want to but fundamentally CC
believes that you know that free
expression that putting things into the
public conversation is important uh and
copyright law has limitations and
exceptions built into it so that you can
do that so that one person controlling
information is uh doesn't stop
conversation about that work importantly
doesn't stop you like learning and
studying from it uh it only protects
like one the creative expression of that
work and not like the facts about it not
you know not its place in culture and
friends talk about machine learning and
how uh that has been enshrined in law uh
is something that CC has supported uh
and we see a lot of analogies between
that and the world of generative AI uh
the way these systems are working
mechanically is a lot like machine
learning basically it's extracting data
extracting information about these
creative works and using it to create
new works uh and that's not in line
intuitively with the way that a lot of
people are thinking about these systems
like it feels different uh maybe it's
because of the scale of it maybe it's
because of the nature of that output but
it's not satisfying to a lot of people
uh but we don't see copyright is the way
to address it so we've been having
conversations with our community and
with other communities on what are the
ways that we should approach it if it's
not copyright uh some of these are
economic models and some of like uh
situations like what Matt is doing uh
things like patreons and kickstarters or
smart contracts are ways for people to
make these things economically
sustainable if copyright is not the way
to do it uh some of these things are
about issues of consent and control and
copyright has been used for that way and
uh I feel like using copyright to
enforce that is a little bit use like
using the police to enforce Community
Norms like you can do it but is that
really where you want to go like uh I
don't feel that's where we want to go uh
so we're looking at things like
developing sets of principles uh
Community governance standards like that
that aren't using an economic right in
ways that it wasn't meant to use uh but
our licenses Were Meant For Sharing they
weren't meant for putting on more
restrictions uh so we're looking at like
the licens are great infrastructure for
some things but what are other
approaches cool well oh does anyone want
to chime in here I love that you lead
out of the window with a statement you
guys
go I I just I want to Echo that view I
mean I I'm clearly on the side of
copyright law permits training of
machine learning models uh AI models um
but I don't think that's the end of the
conversation that's the beginning of the
conversation uh there is much more to be
done I guess culturally around these
technology is uh it's not just about the
law um I think the law is uh an
interesting Baseline on which we can all
creatively experiment I don't think
there is an obvious right answer yet I
think we're at an inflection uh I think
we need to be open-minded try things
learn from those things uh laws aren't
super good at that uh there trying
learning changing not actually what most
legislators do um and ours certainly
doesn't appear to be doing that one that
terribly well right now uh so I think
you know to take some examples there's
been a lot of thinking out there about
what does opting out mean for Works uh
even if you think copyright does permit
these uses that doesn't mean there's not
room for trying other approaches make
sure that everyone knows you what opting
out is could you so just I'll just
mention so open AI has said that if if
you have a website you can set your
robots. text to exclude our crawler from
accessing your website so that your
website will that data will not come
from your site and go into our training
in the future um we've also ony said you
can upload your images and we will not
train on that image uh in future models
so and and for that matter even there
there's legal experimentation the
European Union for example is very clear
that training on copyrighted material is
legal but they have put in the law this
provision that a copyright owner can opt
their work out of that default yes
position um to a no thank you position
um the details of how to do that how to
do that at scale how to make that work
um still to be developed uh so that's
one approach and again I don't think I
think it's too soon to say that's the
only approach I hope we come up with
additional interesting experiments that
are not just let's hope that legislators
can come up with a one-size fits-all
solution tomorrow I think that's that's
too much to hope for that does remind me
of like um the I think it was Kass
sunstein he wrote this book on nudge and
it's basically like the option that you
make the default is usually the option
that that is the thing that people do
especially if it's very difficult to
actually use that to actually opt out
right not everyone even knows what that
is not very easily easy to do right it
does require some skill and some and
some doing so I'm super curious if you
have other examples of where you think
that the cultural norms are already
shifting or what could we do if it
wasn't let's say with copyright law to
create like just a healthy flourishing
ecosystem in which both creators can get
rewarded and and can actively um produce
their work but in which also we're
making progress on like you know better
tool design and Tool development I'd
just like to cite um the work that Holly
hearnen and Matt dryhurst do as sort of
like interventions in this particular
opt out space they have one um you know
with collaborators have a tool called
have I been trained uh.com that uh makes
use of this European law to allow people
to opt out it is uh honored by I I don't
know if open hugging face looks at that
to train or not train its models um and
others I assume I don't know the whole
list
um and they just released a new tool
whose name I it could Duru or something
like I don't know how it's spelled um it
has another approach which is a little
more aggressive that is a software layer
someone can put on their server and uh
when AI engines crawl it it will
actually return sort of spoofed or bad
or like poison pill kind of data to have
the model trained on something else so
you know they're doing some things in
the space that I think are worth looking
at to kind of like as artistic inter
interventions which I think
um again demonstrate how that sort of
cultural activity can have uh effect in
technology conversations like this so
wow interesting the AI safety Community
will be terrified yeah anyone else want
to chime in on this any other ideas here
I was GNA I guess yes and some we're
talking about for want to just to Circle
back to to copyright copyright is uh
extraordin arily powerful in the sense
that you know you can use it in law has
uh possibilities of statutory damages
and Junctions and things like that it is
an extraordinary tool and that's why
people look to it far too often as a
solution to problems which aren't really
copyright problems and so uh yeah I
would be be very hesitant to look to
those tools and and as I was mentioned
before like another one that has been
sometimes used in the space for
searching and and crawling is uh the
Computer Fraud Abuse Act which is the
federal anti-hacking statute uh and that
again is used because it is a
extraordinary you know it's criminal and
and and civil
penalties uh and it is it is far better
to to deal with these things well for I
think ideally you start out with some
Norm changes in signaling uh that uh the
robots. text file has has been generally
honored by uh web search engines uh and
uh you know uh the internet archive
crawler things like that um but not then
enforcing it with with law and the thing
I want us to recognize is even if you
think that copyright is a is is is the
way to go here and and some do um it
doesn't address all of the issues that
that arise um there are uh you one of
the things about copyright is that it is
of of limited times and those limited
times are quite long but they're not
they're not forever uh there's a lot of
things uh out out there that that are
not copyrightable because they're
factual information uh one of the issues
that has been raised in ingesting
material and using it later what about
you know personal or private information
that that is that is part of that and
that's going to be generally factual
information so not not a copyright uh
not a copyright issue so I think it
would be good to develop a series of
norms of what's cool and what's not uh
because I think some of the issues that
people have uh you know they're artist
here and can can expand on this from one
I've heard is also things like getting
credit like uh not necessarily about uh
the the money but just sort of being
honored that they they acknowledged that
uh their creative work was used in this
this other uh piece um you know
something like a cc buy uh license can
can address that in some circumstances
can address it yeah uh so for this
purpose like I don't think like I don't
think it depends on copyright like I
think we all want to see better ways of
like attribution and like provenance and
knowing where something cames from and I
think divorcing that idea from the idea
of because copyright it would be
extremely healthy for for everything
because people want to know like you
want to know where public domain data
came from like you want to know where
like Works where copyright has expired
came from and that has nothing to do
with the copyright it's just uh it's
good practice it's good for like
research it's good for encouraging
people to create uh and sometimes
sometimes there's a copyright reason but
a lot of times uh especially in these
systems where you may not have even used
a copyright able piece like a large
enough piece to be copyrightable you
still want that though I I I also want
to make a a metaphor on the sort of the
the like we don't have a current
expectation or a norm that if you are an
artist who's who's learning how to go
things you go into a museum you see a
lot of art we don't have a norm that
then you write down all the art that you
have seen and you have now ingested into
your artistic mind so that when you make
a painting that is drawn from all the
things that you've learned taking art
history classes going to museums and so
on but it is there
uh and it may be that that that there
are sometimes where there's so much of a
particular artist work in something that
it is worth acknowledging and maybe that
can but like we don't want to Envision a
a sort of future where like everything
that you've ever looked at or considered
as tracks so that we can properly weigh
in a in a andjust where where that
artist comeing from because art is all
about taking the sum of the artistic
things that you have ever seen putting
it through your creative processes and
coming at was something new that may use
some parts may use uh not use a whole
bunch of them but like that is part of
the creative process as has been for for
you know time Memorial so actually I
would like to see as a way to S get get
to your point about like how to get you
know artist is that like taking making
use of these tools to create amazing new
art that can be you know brought out
into the world and so it's less about
like uh figuring out what you know
percentage was in a a a large model for
a particular person is what can you do
to create amazing art with these tools
and then bring that out into the world
totally yeah and I I take that point I
will say one thing about it which is
that I personally think
that uh the conflation of biological
learning through uh lifetime experience
and embodied history and background from
a person of art practice and Education
and Training a machine learning AI model
is dangerous and I don't think we should
like conflate them even though I take
the point that like there is a you know
yeah I mean the dangerous thing though
if you modify copyright law about what
it what it is uh it may then conflate
them because copyright law does not have
a SE in terms of copyright law yes I
totally agree with you yeah well um I'm
glad that we tled this and I know that
one bit that I want to come to is also
you know what are some common myths that
need busting and I think you already
like bust the one like you know that
it's not all about copyright um you know
whenever we talk about these issues
especially about ownership in digital
world in particular with Gen so I would
love to know because we only have really
a little under 10 minutes left so i'
love to know perhaps from all of you um
either if there's another myth that you
really want busted uh just that
something that you want to put out there
that people take away from this or
perhaps something like a a positive
vision of like you know if we figure
this stuff out where could people where
could we be in like let's say 5 to 10
years um you know and and what kind of
like ecosystem with what kind of tools
could we be operating and like how do
you see you know us interacting with
digital ownership or like with digital
Goods but also especially with other AI
agents that uh may may mediate our
interactions uh to some extent so if you
want to start with the myth and then go
all it for the positive Future Vision uh
that would be great shall we start here
sure I I mean well I guess like one one
Vision which I'm not I'm not sure if
it's good or bad it's mostly just like
weird happen is I think that uh or I
guess what it is a myth that copyright
is the only way to protect information
that's not true uh the other probably
the other and maybe even more important
way of protecting information is uh is
secrecy and uh one thing that I think is
interesting is that whether we whether
we call it copyright or we don't call
copyright basically you know just if we
just abstract copyright for a second
copyright is some powerful third party
intervening on behalf of someone in
protecting in protecting public
information that from them right and so
if that kind of happens less if that
kind of doesn't if that doesn't if
people don't feel like there's some way
of getting that kind of protection from
a powerful third party with regards to
their information I think it's likely
what will happen in the culture is a
movement towards secrecy as the mode of
protection of information so you might
and that could be that could be uh like
it's obvious there are obvious ways in
which that could be bad uh you know then
you have a less open culture you might
have like weird secret societies of
artists who aren't showing their work to
other than their friends or kind of
thing right you you also might have um
uh you know but then it also might be
kind of cool and interesting and you
know so it's it's like uh I just think
these are the kinds of uh it is
important to realize that sort of if one
protection goes down there's going to be
consequences in the culture I think that
might be one of them cool I just like
anyone else want
to uh well I guess I I may take a a
different view I think a lot of artists
are out there for purpose of expressing
themselves to the world uh and uh you
know copyright law is is perhaps useful
uh for for uh protecting that but is not
the reason why artists uh create it is
an incentive towards creation but there
are many many artists who are not doing
it for the economic incentive but for
the joy of creating something new and
bringing it to the world and being able
to show it to people and have it be
meaningful and impactful on the people
that are seeing it so I think we will
will still have have art I want to make
have a world in which artists are able
to like have a living and you know be uh
be fulfilled in their lives in lots of
different ways but I also think that
like I'm not so worried that people will
start only making art and secret because
it's more important to have art that is
impactful than it is to make sure that
someone doesn't uh put it into a model
so I guess I I come to a different point
of view on that just one quick uh I mean
I I take the point but one quick
response that is I don't think that the
kind of uh uh I don't think that this
thought or this possibility depends on
the idea that artists are uh just making
work for the economic incentive of
copyright you know there are other
um there are other
um uh uh uh reasons why you might want
some kind of some kind of so for example
I mean if I was a A pamphleteer in the
1500s uh you know and I didn't have
copyright any copyright protection
exactly that then I would uh I would
think differently about uh whether to
publicize that than I would if I had
copyright protection for for example
because you know my text could be could
be misappropriated it could be taken out
of context it could be used to advance a
purpose other than the purpose I Meed I
think you're talking about moral
rights uh indeed yeah I mean that's what
I'm I'm talking about uh I'm talking
about just just you know protection of
information from the state or some other
more powerful actor right I love all the
historical references here keep them
going keep them going I there's a lot to
learn from the history of copyright
there is uh I recommend it actually
because of course copyright arose
originally as an alliance between the
crown and capitalists as a tool of
censorship um not as a tool of
empowering authors in fact the the
empowerment of authors was sort of an
afterthought at best uh and so I think
there are lessons there to be learned as
well uh but let me I just think looking
ahead
um it's very hard to predict uh and I
think we're in some ways trapped between
a binary where there are many people who
have decided to promise the moon with
the AI future that is coming and an
understandable reaction to say it's all
lies um and of course as always the
truth lies somewhere in between I don't
think we are going to be transhuman in
the next 5 years um I also think think
it that this is more than just a flash
in the pan um but when I look back at
history and the history of technology in
particular the last 150 years have told
one story over and over again and it is
that as new technologies arise they
cause for sure disruption and fear but
for the last 150 years everyone has
ended up expanding creativity expanding
the ranks of those who are paid to
create expanding the number of creative
Works expanding the ability of the
audience to access those works every
single one of those Technologies has
ultimately done that I and honestly here
I think I give an enormous amount of
credit to the internet in the last 30
odd years for democratizing Access right
without YouTube without Instagram
without Tik Tok there would be
drastically fewer creators and
drastically fewer creative Works um and
the power of the internet as a tool for
accessing an audience finding an
audience reaching an audience without
needing to go through three major
television networks or five major record
labels that has been I think one of the
greatest uh you know benefits of the
internet what I think makes AI
interesting and new is this is not a
distribution technology
unlike radio television the internet so
many of the Technologies of the last 100
odd years have been about distribution
and copying and making those things
cheaper um AI is not like that at least
not in my five what I can see in the
next five years what it is it is it is a
tool of creativity it is more like
Photoshop than it is like Napster it is
more like GoPro uh than it is like you
know a a file sharing a better way to
distribute um and I think that's
exciting because I that this is
something that is different in many ways
from what we've seen in the last 50 80
odd years and that's what I'm excited
about is what are those possibilities
going to unlock now we have cheap
distribution we've got that solved now
let's make the tools of creativity more
powerful and cheaper thank you um I
think we have about a little bit uh like
over 30 seconds or so for your final
statement so sorry all right so not so
much a myth busted but I think like this
technology has made a lot of people who
thought they had common assumptions
about like what can be owned what should
be owned what can be shared what should
be shared realize that they don't have
those same assum assumptions and it's
going to be very interesting watching
people work that out uh so for for me
like I used to spend a lot of time in
the library after school as like a
latchy kid and I used to think I used to
read a bunch of books and I used to
think like I wonder if one day could
read all of those books and now I know
that would never be possible and like
that's awesome uh but like what if I had
access to what was in all of those books
and you know later on I got an Arts
education I'm a musician and like what
if I could listen to all those
Symphonies and I I never can but like
what if I had access to them like
through these Technologies and I would
love for like the world's knowledge to
be like accessible to me through that
through something that can like ingest
it faster than I can uh and I I want
everybody to have that like and if we
can do that in a way that is sustainable
like that's what I want love it and For
You especially from a local gray area
perspective would beting to you 15
seconds here to make a couple um less
time that I need um I I think the I
definitely agree and we sort of exist to
some degree to um
the creativity enabled by new tools is
undeniable um I think the point point I
would make there is that
all an expanded definition of art that
sort of boundary blurring and isn't just
like you type in a prompt and a picture
comes out but there are a lot of
systemic interventions that can happen
through these tools in their commentary
on society via their
automation that I think are very
interesting artistic projects that we
see sort of happening and so both
through blockchain and ser sort of these
tools you have new sites for artists to
interrogate some of the Power Systems
and structures in society that have not
been able to be there before
um the second point would just be that I
think separating sort of like means of
production from means of distribution is
important to see how those things
operate separately and like monopolizing
one of them and having the other like
has there's some like ramifications of
that that we should all think about uh
and I'll guess I'll close by saying that
uh profit is the unpaid wages of the
working class and leave it at there
wonderful that's a great closing
statement thank you so much to all of
you thank you so so much I really
enjoyed the historical lens then we need
to figure out some bits and pieces right
now but on the future um there maybe
this emerging more iterative game uh
that may result in very new norms and
expectations and hopefully lots more
Innovation art uh and and yeah
creativity thank you so so much
everyone